[Music]
Hello everyone, I'm Norman Wildberger. We're
talking about box arithmetic, and a big thank
you to all my Patreon supporters and members
of the Wild Egg Mathematics channel. Today,
we're going to be extending our algebra that
we're developing in quite a novel direction,
almost a missing chapter of, say, high school
algebra, what we get when we enlarge our view of
polynomials to include the sort of Laurent-type
polynomials with negative exponents. This is
going to allow us to analyze more carefully
this notion of symmetry and anti-symmetry,
or alternating aspect of poly
numbers that I introduced last time.
At the end of the video, I'm actually
going to connect the main objects that
we're going to be creating today, which are
going to be called central poly numbers,
with actually a whole range of different
mathematical topics. Some of them are quite
important, in fact, sort of really central
importance in 20th-century mathematics and
physics. So I'll just touch base
very quickly with those things,
but I want you to appreciate that even though
we're doing very elementary things here, okay,
we are arriving at objects which are really very,
very fundamental for mathematics and physics.
Okay, so before we get onto that though, let's
just enlarge our arithmetic a little bit and
introduce subtraction to our operations
that we're doing with these M sets.
So it's simple enough because we have a minus one
now. So we can define if A and B are M sets or
anti-M sets, or maybe if we want to include both
of them at the same time, I might say A/M sets,
okay, to include the families of M sets and
anti-M sets and combinations of them. So then
we'll define A minus B to be simply A plus one-bar
B, or in other words, A plus minus one times B.
So here's an example. Here's an M set, perhaps A,
and here's another M set, perhaps B, and
we're taking the difference A minus B.
So this thing here, okay, um, minus this thing
here. The definition is that we should take the
same thing here and instead we should add minus
one, there's minus one times this second one.
Now in terms of a more standard notation, this
thing here, you see here, it has a 2 inside it,
has an empty M set that represents zero,
and this thing here is an anti-one, okay,
so that's what this thing is. And this thing
here, well, there's a two, there's another two,
so two, two. There's a one bar, okay, it's the
negation of one, and here is just an anti-zero,
okay. So when we multiply the second one with the
minus one, what do we get? Okay, well, multiplying
by minus one, what it does is it takes all of
the entries and it takes their antis. So that
means that all the bounding boxes have to change
color from black to red or from red to black. So
this one here is going to change into a red box
with two black ones, same with this. This one here
is going to change into a red box with a red box
inside. This one here is just going to change from
an anti-zero to a zero, okay. And once we have
this, then the addition is of course just the
usual combining them. So we just put everything
in an M box, but when we do that, this thing here,
this 2 and this anti-2 are going to annihilate
each other because these things are antis. They're
antis because the bounding box, the containers are
of different colors, one's black and one's red,
and otherwise inside they're identical. So they're
identical except that one's the anti of the other.
So they're going to annihilate. We'll still
have one more of them left over, we'll have
two empty boxes, and we'll have one of these and
one of these. And then when we list what we have,
we have one bar anti, so that's that thing there,
okay. And if it was black on the outside, that
would be a one bar, but it's red on the outside,
so it's a one bar anti. There's two zeros, there's
our anti-2, and this is an anti-one, okay. So
that's how we do subtraction in this M set world.
Okay, so when we went from poly
numbers to integral poly numbers,
the big step was that we went from M sets
of natural numbers to M sets of integers.
And that means we have an interpretation now of
polynomials with also negative integer exponents,
not just natural number exponents. These are
integral poly numbers. And in this world,
there's this fundamental symmetry, the sigma
sort of reflection that takes Alpha to the N
to Alpha to the minus N. And then with respect
to that, we defined an I poly to be symmetric
if sigma of P equals P, and anti-symmetric or
alternating if sigma P equals minus P or P bar.
And I claim that the study of symmetric
and alternating integral poly numbers is
really something of a missing chapter of very
elementary algebra, something that you could
have been taught back in early high school. But
because the emphasis there is strictly towards
the positive exponent side of things, polynomials,
this is not visible, okay. So we want to remedy
that today, and we'll do that by starting with the
two important families of integral polynomials,
the A_Ns, which are going to be alternating, and
the B_Ns, which are going to be symmetric. And
we're going to define them for arbitrary natural
numbers N, so for arbitrary integers N. So A sub N
for any integer N and also B sub N for any integer
N. We could also restrict this to natural numbers,
but I think it's more convenient if we do this
in this sort of more natural generality, okay.
So let's start with the symmetric ones.
We might call them symmetric binomials. B
sub N is an integer. Here's the definition. B
sub N is the M set consisting of N and N bar.
So that's an integer and that's its negation. So
the N corresponds to Alpha to the N, and the N
bar corresponds to what we might call Alpha to the
minus N. So we're taking this obviously symmetric
integral poly number, okay. What do they look
like? Well, here's sort of a list near zero.
When N is zero, then both of these things are
zero. So we're getting zero, zero, in the,
that's the number two. It's important to make a
note of that, okay. B sub zero is two, not one,
as you might otherwise think. And then B sub
one is going to be Alpha to the minus one plus
Alpha. B sub two is Alpha to the minus two plus
Alpha squared, etc. And B to the minus one is
Alpha to the minus one plus Alpha to the minus
minus one. So it's Alpha to the minus one plus
Alpha. It's the same as B sub one, okay. And
B sub minus two, I should put minus two there,
B sub minus two is Alpha to the minus two plus
Alpha squared. That's again the same as B sub two,
okay. So these are something of a basis
for the symmetric integral poly numbers.
And what's particularly interesting is what
happens when you multiply two of them. So let's
look at B3 times B5. There's B3, Alpha to the
minus three plus Alpha cubed. B5, Alpha to the
minus five plus Alpha to the five. And when we
multiply them, we get Alpha to the minus eight.
This combination here is Alpha to the minus two.
This combination here is Alpha to the two. And
this combination is Alpha to the eight. And we
see that what we're picking up is a B2 and a B8,
okay. And note that the sum of three plus
five is eight and the difference here is two,
okay. If we squared one, so let's say take
B sub four and we square it. There it is
there. We square it. Well, we get the square
of the first term, which is Alpha to the minus
eight. Square of the second term, which is
Alpha to the eight. And twice the product,
we get two. So that is then B zero.
There's B zero and Alpha to the eight
plus Alpha to the minus eight is B eight. And
again, this zero is like the difference between
the four and the four. And this eight
is like the sum of the four and four.
So as we've already noted, B sub N is the M
set N bar N. Clearly, B sub N bar is equal to
B sub N because these two things just interchange
places. And the formula that we've just looked at,
a special case of, is that B sub M times B
sub N equals B sub M minus N plus B sub M
plus N. And there's no restriction here on
the indices. They can be arbitrary integers.
A little bit more sophisticated is what happens
when you multiply three of them together, say B
sub M, B sub N, B sub P. Then it's an exercise
for you to check that you're going to get four
terms. You're going to get a B sub M minus N minus
P, B sub M plus N minus P, B sub M minus N plus P,
and B sub M plus N plus P. And remember that any
one of these things is unchanged if we negate
the index. So for example, B nine times B four
times B three, nine minus four minus three is two,
nine plus four minus three is ten, nine minus
four plus three is eight, and nine plus four plus
three is sixteen. And it also works when zero is
involved. So B seven, B four, B three, seven minus
four minus three is zero. B seven plus
four, seven plus four minus three is eight,
seven minus four plus three is six, and seven plus
four plus three is fourteen. And do note that this
B zero being two is, you know, consistent,
sort of essential for these formulas to work.
A little exercise for you, try to figure out
what the binomial expansion looks like in
this case. Just a variant of the usual one, but
it's worthwhile clarifying. So if we take B sub
M for an arbitrary integer M and we raise
it to the K, where K is a natural number,
like zero, one, two, three, etc., what
do we get when we expand all of that out?
So the B_N poly numbers were
pretty well the simplest symmetric
integral poly numbers. Here are pretty well
the simplest alternating integral poly numbers,
the A sub Ns. So they're going to be defined also
for N, an integer. And they're defined in a very
similar way. A sub N is the M set consisting of N
with anti-N bar, okay. And the anti has the effect
of introducing a coefficient of -1. So we'll
write -Alpha to the minus N plus Alpha to the N.
And then we see that now if we negate the index
N, A sub N bar, we get the negation of A sub N.
And here are some examples. So A sub zero
is importantly zero, because when N is zero,
there's a zero here and a zero anti, and the
zero and the zero anti annihilate, and we just
get an empty set, or we just get zero. A sub one
is -Alpha to the minus one plus Alpha. A sub two
is -Alpha to the minus two plus Alpha squared.
And A sub minus one is the negative of this one,
so Alpha to the minus one minus Alpha. A
sub minus two is the negative of this one,
so it's Alpha to the minus two
minus Alpha squared, and so on.
So let's do a general multiplication. Let's
multiply A sub M times A sub N. So there's A
sub M, there's A sub N. When we multiply, we get
four terms. So the product of these two is Alpha
to the minus M plus N. The product of this one
and this one, or maybe this one and this one,
is -Alpha to the M minus N. The product of these
two is -Alpha to the N minus M, and the product
of these two is Alpha to the M plus N. And from
that, we can see that the product is actually,
well, this thing here, these two terms,
okay, are getting -B sub M minus N.
So we have to take these two out, and then we get
two plus signs, and we're getting B sub M minus N,
which is the same as B sub N minus M. And
these outside terms, both also with positive
one coefficients, giving us B sub M plus N,
because here's Alpha to the M plus N and Alpha
to the minus M plus N. So the product of these
two A's is a sum of two B's. And you might like
to write down the corresponding formula for the
product of three of these A sub Ns, and also how
do you take the corresponding binomial power of
a given A sub M, again K being a natural number.
So it's not too hard to see that if you have
two symmetric integral poly numbers and you
multiply them, you're going to get another
symmetric one. If you have two alternating
ones and you multiply them, you're going to
get a symmetric one. However, if you have an
alternating one times a symmetric one, in that
case, you're going to get an alternating one.
So that's the formula that we're going to look at
now. What happens when we multiply an alternating
binomial with a symmetric binomial? A
sub M, there it is there, times B sub N,
there it is there. Well, just four terms, just
as before, we get a -Alpha to the minus M plus N,
we get an Alpha M, Alpha minus N, Alpha to the
M minus N, and these terms, Alpha to the N minus
M with a minus sign, and a plus sign with Alpha
to the M plus N. And then these two terms here,
these ones, Alpha to the M minus N
minus Alpha to the N minus M, that's A
sub M minus N. And these
outside ones are A sub M plus N.
Now the A's, remember, are alternating. So if we
negate the index there, which we also could, then
we'd have to put a minus sign, so we could also
write it as -A sub N minus M plus A sub N plus M.
So this is a nice formula. And a very interesting
and important special case is when M is just one.
M is just one. In that case, you get A1 times
B N equals -A N minus one plus A N plus one.
And that then has the consequence with this little
formula here, which we might call a lemma, okay,
that if you have a chain of B's, B sub
K, B sub K plus two, B sub K plus four,
so going up by two each step, up to some B sub L,
so these are separated by an even number of steps,
then the result of multiplying by A1 is -A sub K
minus one, so one less than that index, plus A sub
L plus one, one bigger than that index. And the
reason is, sort of immediate from this, because
when you multiply the A1 times the BK, you're
getting a -A sub K minus one, that's that term
there, plus a plus A sub K plus one. But that plus
A sub K plus one that you've just got is going
to be canceled with the term that you're going to
get by multiplying the A1 times the B K plus two,
the left term. It's going to actually exactly
cancel that because you're going to get A sub K
plus one and A sub K plus three, okay. So in
the intermediate spaces between these things,
the two A's that you're getting from the left
and from the right always have opposite signs,
and so they're going to cancel. And all
that's going to be left is the one to
the left of the left one and the
one to the right of the right one.
Now, there's sort of two special cases of
this also. When K equals one, in this formula,
if we start with one and they go out by
two, so one, three, five, up to some L,
then the first term is going to be -A sub zero,
because one minus one is zero. And that's zero,
so there'll only be one term, that's A sub L
plus one. On the other hand, if K equals two,
and we look at sort of even ones, if we start just
with B two, B four, B six, all the way up to B M,
then the formula is going to tell us what we
should get is -A sub one plus A sub M plus one.
But A sub one, okay, is... So
there'll be that on this side here,
it's the same as over here. So we can bring it
to the left-hand side by putting an A one there,
okay. So if we rewrite the formula that you
get by starting with this one, with B sub two,
we rewrite it and bring the A sub one that
we get over here, then the result is just a
single A sub M plus one on the right-hand side.
So in both cases, if we have a string of B's
that are going up by two each time, and we
multiply by A one, we are getting a single A.
In fact, the A just has an index one bigger than
the biggest B that appears in each of these cases.
That's a quite important kind of formula, which
motivates us to the definition of the objects
that actually we're really interested in, which
are the central poly numbers, denoted by C sub N,
okay. So the central poly numbers, C sub N, and
now we'll stick with natural number indices, N
equals zero, one, two, etc. So C sub zero is just
going to be one. C sub one is going to be Alpha
to the minus one plus Alpha, so it's symmetric,
that's the same as B one. So there's a picture
of C zero in terms of a mass distribution or a
density, single mass of unit size sitting above
zero. Here's a picture of C one, unit masses above
one and minus one on our integral number line.
C two is going to be Alpha to the minus two plus
one plus Alpha squared, that's one plus B two. It
has three equal masses, equally separated on the
number line, symmetric about zero at minus two,
at zero, at two. C three, similarly, Alpha to the
minus three plus Alpha to the minus one plus Alpha
plus Alpha cubed, that's B one plus B three,
represented by four equally spaced unit masses,
symmetric around zero at minus three, minus one,
one, and three. And then we carry on like this.
C four is one plus B two plus B four, sort
of corresponding to the even powers of B,
except that's not B zero, okay. That's only half
of B zero, that's why I write it separately. So
one plus B two plus B four. Well, the odd ones, B
one plus B three plus B four are like that. So we
just sort of follow that pattern for even and
for odd. So C four is Alpha to the minus four,
going up by steps of two all the way up to
Alpha to the four. C five, going from Alpha
to the minus five to Alpha five, including all the
intermediate powers, which are separated from the
bottom by a multiple of two as we go up, minus
five, minus three, minus one, one, three, five.
So these are the central polynomials. They're all
symmetric, okay. So you should think about them
as being perhaps a somewhat more sophisticated or
a little bit more complicated variant to the B's.
They also form a basis of the symmetric poly
numbers. So if we have an arbitrary symmetric
polynomial, we can write it uniquely in terms of
the B's. But it's not too hard to see we can also
write it uniquely in terms of the C's. And the C's
are a little bit more sophisticated, but they're
also a little bit more uniform. And it turns
out that they're connected with a huge amount of
significant mathematics, okay. So very briefly
now, I just want to indicate very roughly
all the remarkable, or at least some of the
remarkable aspects to these central poly numbers,
C zero, C one, C two, C three, C four, etc., that
we've defined going on in this direction, okay.
They're connected with so many important
aspects of 20th-century mathematics and physics.
Let's start here, okay. They're intimately
connected with Chebyshev polynomials,
which you will have run into, actually
Chebyshev polynomials of the second kind,
which you will have run into if you're a
member of my Wild Egg Mathematics courses
YouTube channel, where I have a whole series on
interesting families of orthogonal polynomials
and how to look at them in a somewhat novel
linear algebra/number theory point of view.
They're related to Gaussian binomial coefficients
and Q series, okay. And there's also, in fact,
over at Wild Egg, there's also a series of videos
that I'm doing on Q series, and the Gaussian
binomial coefficients figure very prominently
there. So these are in some sense variants of
the Gaussian binomial coefficients, which are
in some cases more natural or maybe more useful
than the Gaussian binomial coefficients, but not
in all cases. There's a good reason for studying
both of them. And in fact, that other point
of view is closely related to quantum groups.
Also in physics, these things are coming out very
naturally in angular momentum quantum mechanics.
They figure prominently in representation
theory of Lie groups, okay. So in the world
of Lie groups, there are things called compact
simple Lie groups, and the simplest one is SU2.
The simplest non-abelian one is SU2, okay, and
something called representation theory. And it
turns out that these things here are essentially
the characters, the irreducible characters of SU2
when you view them in the right way. And as such,
they're also intimately connected with harmonic
analysis on the three-dimensional sphere, not the
two-dimensional sphere that we find in our space,
but the three-dimensional sphere, which is another
manifestation of SU2. But you can do sort of
spherical harmonics on that thing, and it turns
out that these things are intimately connected
with spherical harmonics on S3. They're very
close to the Weyl character formula, and arguably,
I've already shown you the Weyl character
formula today in the simplest of all cases, okay.
I actually also have to put in, yeah, I have
to put in another ADE graphs, okay. ADE graphs,
so the Weyl character formula applies to
all of these graphs. But in the AN case,
sort of a special case, this is actually the
simplest A case. It's the A1 case. So this is
like the simplest version of some huge story. And
there's also a series in my Wild Egg Mathematics
course channel all about ADE graphs and dynamics
on graphs, and you know, and these things will
figure there. Hypergroups, well, on this channel,
I have a series called Diffusion Symmetry,
where I'm introducing you to the world of
hypergroups. These are very close to being
really central objects in hypergroup theory, okay.
So I'm going to be meeting them in that series
of videos. Closely connected with that, they're
intimately connected with random walks. And going
back to physics, they're intimately connected with
modern theory, the electroweak force in physics.
So there's a lot to this story. But in fact,
I have this sort of aspiration to explain a
lot of this stuff, maybe all of it at some
point. But in any case, since this series
is only dealing with elementary algebra, I want
to alert you that this very naive point of view,
we're just playing around with M sets, and now we
have these integral poly numbers, etc., and what's
arising sort of naturally as we're just following
our nose, doing the simplest possible thing,
are objects whose algebraic structure is actually
completely key in a lot of really important areas.
And I want to talk more about what the nature of
that algebraic structure is. It has to do with the
multiplicative structure of these central poly
numbers. And you might like to play around with
that and ask yourself, what happens if I multiply,
say, C3 times C7? Okay, symmetric polynomials,
what's the product going to be? That's an
interesting question. We'll talk about that in
our next video. I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]